Rewrote parts of README.md (#2)
ClinicalGenomicsGBG/insilico_wgs: README.md

# insilico\_wgs

You can use the files in this repo to 

* create bed files from a refseq-database 
* do a coverage analysis using mpileup on a collection of validation samples from the novaseq and receive a bunch of output files with various coverage stats.

> ### create\_bedfile

Reviewer: I understand the previous headings better... (Create bed files / Coverage analysis)

Small detail, but: why go down two heading levels each time? I find it looks confusing especially in the part "The genes/transcripts can’t be found" (because "Transcripts" and "Gene names" look so big compared to the section header).

> To create a bed file you will need a list of reference sequences (`refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`) and either a list of genes or transcripts. You can create a txt file with your list in `insilico_panels/KG/[new cool panel]/[new cool panelname].txt` and use that. 

Reviewer 2: textfile or .txt-file

Typically KK uses gene lists and KG uses transcript lists. Here is how to use `create_bed.py` in the two cases:

##### Using a list of transcripts

The following command will provide exonic as well as UTR regions:
`./create_bed.py -r refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq -t <transcript list> -o <output folder>`

**options:**
`-e 2`  Adds two bases, to make sure splice sites are included as well. This is usually something that KG wants.

##### Using a list of genes
The following command will provide introns too.
`./create_bed.py -r refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq -g <gene list> -o <output folder>`

**options**

> `-l yes`  Extract the longest transcripts for all genes. In case you want to exclude the intron. (Genes can also have overlapping exons of different lengths.)

Reviewer: Another detail: based in the Swedish version, it should be "extract the longest transcript [singular] for all genes". Very much a detail, but since I do not fully understand what this part does, it might be an important detail (?).

Author: You're right, I will change it! :)

> `-l yes`  Extract the longest transcripts for all genes. In case you want to exclude the intron. (Genes can also have overlapping exons of different lengths.)

Reviewer: `-l yes` Extract the longest transcripts for all genes. In case you want to exclude the intron. (Genes can also have overlapping exons of different lengths.)
```suggestion
`-l yes`  Extract the longest transcript for all genes; use in case you want to exclude the introns. (Genes can have overlapping exons of different lengths, and this can be problematic when calculating coverage.)
```

KK usually wants all the information they can get, allowing you to run the command without the `-l`flag.

##### The genes/transcripts can’t be found

> Sometimes genes or transcripts can not be found in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`. It could be that the transcript has been updated since 2019-03-01 or that the gene name has been changed. If an element of the input list was not found, the script will output a file named notfound.txt. Should the gene/transcript not be present in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`there are a few things you can try to solve it:

Reviewer 2: Would like some information regarding hg38 as well. This uses a different gtf-file

Author: Detta lämnas till en ny PR enligt överenskommelse mellan Emma ch Alvar

**Transcripts**
Try deleting the version part of the transcript name in case there is another version present. If there is, check with the person requesting the panel update if it is okay to use the other version.

**Genes names**
Check if the gene has another name (e.g. by using [GeneCards database](https://www.genecards.org) ) that might be present in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`. To replace a name use the script `replace_names.sh <old name> <new name>`. The changes will be saved in `changes_made`.  

> ### insilico\_panels

Reviewer: Same comment as above about having more descriptive titles

The in silico panels used in wopr are also stored here. Every panel folder contains a gene or transcript list as well as a bed file created by create\_bed.py. The lists and bed files of the panels currently used by wopr should also be in `WOPR/references/insilico_panels/`. 

> ### validate\_wrapper

Reviewer: Idem descriptive title

KK usually wants all the information they can get, allowing you to run the command without the `-l`flag.

### The genes/transcripts can’t be found
Sometimes genes or transcripts can not be found in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`. It could be that the transcript has been updated since 2019-03-01 or that the gene name has been changed. If an element of the input list was not found, the script will output a file named notfound.txt. Should the gene/transcript not be present in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`there are a few things you can try to solve it:

**Transcripts**
Try deleting the version part of the transcript name in case there is another version present. If there is, check with the person requesting the panel update if it is okay to use the other version.

**Genes names**
Check if the gene has another name (e.g. by using [GeneCards database](https://www.genecards.org) ) that might be present in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`. To replace a name use the script `replace_names.sh <old name> <new name>`. The changes will be saved in `changes_made`.  
<br />

## The insilico\_panels folder

> The in silico panels used in wopr are also stored here. Every panel folder contains a gene or transcript list as well as a bed file created by create\_bed.py. The lists and bed files of the panels currently used by wopr should also be in `WOPR/references/insilico_panels/`. 

Reviewer 3: Could you be more specific with what you mean by '....wopr are also stored here'? not so clear where this "here" is :)

<br />

## Coverage analysis (for in silico panel verification into WGS analysis)

In order to create a coverage analysis you will need a bed file for the panel in question.

### How to run
```
# run as root
cd validate_wrapper/

> ./validate_wrapper /path/to/bedfile.bed [departmentID = KG/KK,PAT] [annotationlevel = 1/2/3/4/5]

Reviewer 3: Any description for different annotation levels?
Is this what you wrote in "Place in silico panel into routine analysis" section?

Author: yes, you're correct, that's the part about levels in "Place in silico panel into routine analysis", but I agree that it could be more clear here.

# insilico\_wgs

You can use the files in this repo to :

* create bed files from a refseq-database 
* do a coverage analysis using mpileup on a collection of validation samples from the novaseq and receive a bunch of output files with various coverage stats.

## Create a bedfile

> To create a bed file you will need a list of reference sequences (`refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`) and either a list of genes or transcripts. You can create a .txt file with your list in `insilico_panels/KG/[new cool panel]/[new cool panelname].txt` and use that. 

Reviewer: Perhaps you could start the paragraph by saying "This corresponds to subfolder create_bedfile".

Typically KK uses gene lists and KG uses transcript lists. Here is how to use `create_bed.py` in the two cases:

### Using a list of transcripts

The following command will provide exonic as well as UTR regions:
`./create_bed.py -r refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq -t <transcript list> -o <output folder>`

**options**
`-e 2`  Adds two bases, to make sure splice sites are included as well. This is usually something that KG wants.

### Using a list of genes
The following command will provide introns too.
`./create_bed.py -r refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq -g <gene list> -o <output folder>`

**options**

> `-l yes`  Extract the longest transcript for all genes. In case you want to exclude the intron. (Genes can also have overlapping exons of different lengths.)

Reviewer: Which of the two descriptions is correct?

KK usually wants all the information they can get, allowing you to run the command without the `-l`flag.

### The genes/transcripts can’t be found
Sometimes genes or transcripts can not be found in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`. It could be that the transcript has been updated since 2019-03-01 or that the gene name has been changed. If an element of the input list was not found, the script will output a file named notfound.txt. Should the gene/transcript not be present in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`there are a few things you can try to solve it:

**Transcripts**
Try deleting the version part of the transcript name in case there is another version present. If there is, check with the person requesting the panel update if it is okay to use the other version.

**Genes names**
Check if the gene has another name (e.g. by using [GeneCards database](https://www.genecards.org) ) that might be present in `refseq_20190301_ncbiRefSeq`. To replace a name use the script `replace_names.sh <old name> <new name>`. The changes will be saved in `changes_made`.  
<br />

## The insilico\_panels folder

> The in silico panels used in wopr are also stored here. Every panel folder contains a gene or transcript list as well as a bed file created by create\_bed.py. The lists and bed files of the panels currently used by wopr should also be in `WOPR/references/insilico_panels/`. 

Reviewer: Suggestion: "should also be in the WOPR repo at `WOPR/references/insilico_panels/`"

<br />

> ## Coverage analysis (for in silico panel verification into WGS analysis)

Reviewer: Similar to above - say it corresponds to folder `validate_wrapper`

In order to create a coverage analysis you will need a bed file for the panel in question.

### How to run
```
# run as root
cd validate_wrapper/

> ./validate_wrapper /path/to/bedfile.bed [departmentID = KG/KK,PAT] [annotationlevel = 1/2/3/4/5]

Reviewer: Suggestion: replace by KK/KG/PAT

# example:
./validate_wrapper.sh /path/to/insilico_wgs/insilico_panels/KK/rubbningar_i_kopparmetabolism.v1.0/rubbningar_i_kopparmetabolism.v1.0.bed KK 1
```
### Result directory
```

> /medstore/Development/WGS_validation/in_silico_panels/${department}/validate/panels/

Reviewer: In the command above there is the option "PAT", but in the result directory there is only `klinisk_genetik` or `klinisk_kemi`. Do you know where the PAT results go?

Author: changed this validate_wrapper.sh :)

Reviewer: Nice :)
The result folder does not exist for PAT though (`ls /medstore/Development/WGS_validation/in_silico_panels/`) so it could be that the code doesn't run because the first `mkdir` won't work. Perhaps you can test it with a fake panel?

```

## How to get the panel validated
Some of the results from the coverage analysis are to be sent to the responsible clinician as an excel file. There is a template excel that you should fill in as described below.

> **Template excel:** boxsync - /Dokument/WGS/konstitutionell/insilico

Reviewer: How can "boxsync" be accessed?

Reviewer 4: My guess this is some kind of remnant from when we used Box at GU (dropbox like service). Instead we should refer to the sharepoint

Author: Added to sharepoint and changed link, is it okay place to put it?

Finally give the name some cool name, the name of the insilicopanel is a very cool name and also makes sense and then sent to the clinician! They will do amazing things with it. 

### NOTE Before doing the below step wait for notification from your clinical contact 

> Before doing the below step which would apply the panel for use in clinical routine analysis you need to wait for confirmation from the clinician that the panel has been approved. They will notify you. You don't have to wait until the official "start-date" (införande) but can add it to routine before AS LONG AS IT HAS BEEN APPROVED. 

Author: Is this part something we should change?

Reviewer 5: Change in what way?

Author: I meant change the paragraph in some way. I would just like to know if someone has an opinion about it. :)
